Dr. Dachs is returning and he is going to continue with our discussion of emergency topics, including trauma, wound care and the surgical abdomen.

All right, learning objectives, here we go, we're on injury prevention.

So, we're gonna talk about injury prevention 'cause we as primary care doctors, we like to prevent things, that's our role.

So, the #1 cause of injury related deaths in the United States as of 2019 were falls, actually, falls but right up there and increasing, and I'm sure will exceed falls, will be firearms in the United States and in children age zero to 18, it is the most common cause of death from injury in children, MVA's are there at 36,000.

All right, speaking of MVA's and children, you're gonna recommend car seats?

Yes.

Used to be you used to have to memorize, you know, your zero to two, your ages, zero to two, two to four, six to eight, you know, you know, zero to two, you put 'em in the backseat, face backwards from that, it's really simple now, just go on whatever the manufacturer recommendations for the car seat is.

Just, that's an easy one to tell your patients, an easy one to answer on the Boards, just follow the manufacturer's recommendations.

When it gets to, we're talking about children and trauma and death, I told you, zero to 18 is firearms, let's go to the subgroup of ages one to 14.

One to 14, the most common cause of trauma related death is drowning and you know, and that's why it's very important that the recommendations for pools in your backyard have fencing around all four sides, okay?

You cannot use the house as one of those sides because the toddler will toddle outta your house and go right into the pool, so you should have fencing on all four sides of a pool and then zero to one, suffocation's a problem.

This is why we have the Bed to Back Program.

Get the kid's, all the toys and blankies and binkies out of the bassinet.

It's amazing how many infants still sleep in the bed with the parents.

Tell them do not do that, please do not do that.

I had one terrible SIDS death but it wasn't SIDS death, it was an infant, it was a very tired father, a good father, a tired father had the child in his, you know, his arms, he was in a recliner chair and he fell asleep, the child's face went into sort of his armpit area and was suffocated.

So, be very, very wary of, yeah, and if they're in the bed, that's too easy for them to roll into the parent or some bedding.

All right, child abuse, so they like to ask a question occasionally on child abuse, so let's do this.

"Child abuse should be suspected in all the following except", except, "7-month-old with diffuse cerebral and retinal hemorrhages, B, a 2-year-old with three rib fractures after a fall, C, a 6-month-old with multiple lower extremity bruises from falls or D, a 20-month-old with spiral fracture of the distal tibia." Which one is not child abuse?

Three of 'em are or should be suspected.

Okay, boom, boom, yeah, the answer there is D, the answer there is D and I'll go through that.

So, the other ones, let me just go through this, so hope, yeah, a lot of you, nobody picked, or very rarely have you picked the cerebral and retinal hemorrhages.

You see cerebral, retinal hemorrhages on an infant, that's shaken baby syndrome until proven otherwise, that's an easy one.

All right, how about the bruises on the lower extremity of a 6-month-old?

Well, 6-month-olds typically are not toddling along, okay?

They shouldn't have bruises on their legs, so if they don't cruise, they don't bruise.

You don't buy the story, "Oh, they kick the crib a lot." Nah, nah, they're not doing it to get multiple bruises on their extremities.

Rib fractures in children are rare under the age of three because they're ribs are very hypermobile at that time, so the way you will often see rib fractures in that age group is because someone went whack, okay?

As for the spiral fracture of the distal tibia that often is thought of as abuse, it's not, it's a common fracture in toddlers.

What happens in toddlers, I'll get up here and try to demonstrate.

For those of you who have had children and toddlers, you know, they just, they go around like this and what they do is they will spin out one time and they'll give themselves a spiral fracture of the distal tibia and so that is not abuse.

If it's a transverse fracture of the distal tibia, then someone went whack, okay, so that's what, that's the difference.

All right, that's child abuse, let's go on to wound care and soft tissue injuries.

"27-year-old tripped and fell in the garden, sustaining a laceration to the thenar eminence of the hand.

The patient noted that there was glass silvers in the ground", slivers, I should say, "in the ground and is uncertain if there's glass in the wound.

The wound is a 3 cm laceration without active bleeding.

Despite the patient's efforts to clean the wound, there appears to be still dirt in the wound", 'cause they didn't go at it much, "The patient's last tetanus immunization was seven years ago." Got the picture?

So, "All the following would be appropriate except", irrigating the wound with tap water, decontaminating the wound with Betadine, providing a tetanus booster or do you "obtaining an X-ray for potentially embedded glass." B, you don't pour Betadine into wounds.

Betadine, full strength Betadine is cytotoxic, don't start decontaminating wounds with Betadine, all right?

You want the wound to heal, of course.

All right, but actually when it comes to tetanus, we'll talk about the tetanus thing first, is that tetanus is really, really, really rare in the United States.

Most people who get tetanus have never been immunized for it, there's like 30 cases per year in the United States.

The CDC recommendations still are the same.

In other words, if it's a clean wound, it's every 10 years.

I alluded this patient has a dirty wound, right?

So, then it's every five years.

If it comes in as a dirty wound and it's been over five years, give 'em a tetanus booster.

If they've, the booster can be a Tdap, okay, or it can just, you get that once, get that once at least and then if they come back again, let's say 10 years later, you can give 'em another Tdap or you can just do a regular Td, it doesn't matter, okay, but one time, once, you should at least get a Tdap.

All right, irrigating with tap water is really good.

If you can get, if you can numb it up, bring 'em over to the sink, I do that, there's a case of ours, just bring it over to the, you know, to the tap water, let it go.

Okay, numb it up, let it go, and here's the wound care principles and if you think there's any glass possible, you do an X-ray.

Glass shows up on X-ray, right, all the way down to 2 mm.

Who goes on antibiotics?

We'll talk about this a little bit later, but anybody who is high risk.

A high risk patient, for example, an immunocompromised patient or a high risk wound.

Was it a bite?

Was it a very contaminated wound?

Was it on a part of a body that has a propensity for getting infected like your fingers, hands, toes, feet, those sort of areas, okay?

All right, and know the neurologic innervation of the hand.

I think Dr. Geary went over this with you, hopefully, if not, I put the, you know, what's the radial nerve, median nerve and ulnar nerve?

How to do the test for those in the supplemental slides.

They love asking that question, okay?

Rhabdo, actually, this is alluded to by Dr. Levine in the last lecture.

Rhabdo happens with people who have significant trauma, a lot of muscle necrosis.

What they will have is their urine dipstick will be positive, positive, the dipstick is positive for, quote, blood but when you look under the microscope there's no blood there because it's all myoglobin from the muscle injury, okay?

So, a diagnosis of rhabdo is when their CPK is markedly elevated and you're now spilling myoglobin in the urine.

You treat that with fluids, fluids, fluids, fluids, fluids, you keep flushing the kidneys.

Okay, Compartment Syndrome.

Compartment Syndrome is the other thing, injury that can happen to the extremity.

Here you have this crush injury to an extremity, the classic is the lower extremity, but it can be any other extremity, and when the pressure inside that compartment, the magic number is greater than 30 millimeters of mercury, that's the magic number, that's when you should call up a surgeon, a trauma surgeon, a vascular surgeon, orthopedic, whoever's available, they need to then do their fasciotomy and open up that compartment.

Environmental injuries, I'll mention it real quick, there's heat and cold.

Cold and heat ones, the cold is real easy, either a frostnip or frostbite, the difference between the two is that frostbite, there's cellular death, frostnip, there's no tissue loss.

The treatment for frostbite is you do rapid rewarming in circulating water, there, you got it.

Heat, just the opposite, is the difference between heat exhaustion and heat stroke.

Very common, you know, if I'm sure down here in Texas you'll see a lot of heat related stuff coming to your ER and you'd have to decide if it's exhaustion, they'll be sweaty, they'll feel terrible, but they're sweating and their neuro exam is normal.

Heat stroke, you have the temperature greater than 104 and they're having CNS dysfunction.

CNS dysfunction is not, "I feel terrible and weak", that's not CNS dysfunction.

They will have, they will look septic, they will have some CNS dysfunction, they can't speak, they can't do something, okay?

All right, I wanna move on to the surgical abdomen now, that's the last 18 minutes of my talk.

That's the other, we're gonna go, we're gonna move into a different area.

I've done the environmental stuff now we're now gonna put our surgeon hats on.

All right, so David mentioned he's gonna cover upper and lower GI later, those are the non-surgical stuff, I'm gonna do the surgical stuff and when it comes to the surgical abdomen, there's really only two reasons to call up a surgeon.

One is the patient has acute peritonitis, right?

They have peritonitis and a surgeon needs to get involved for that or they're obstructed.

That's it, those are the two reasons to call up a surgeon immediately that you're gonna want them for.

All right, so let's dig into this a little bit further, of course.

When it comes to peritonitis, you have spontaneous bacterial peritonitis, you have secondary and you got tertiary.

So, the spontaneous peritonitis doesn't necessarily need a surgeon, but it does need some antibiotics, all right, and this happens in your cirrhotic patients, typically a gram-negative, E. coli gets in there and you need to put them on broad spectrum antibiotics that covers particularly E. coli.

Secondary peritonitis is what you and I almost all, the more common thing.

This is the appendicitis, this is the diverticulitis, all right, and so here you really need to call up your surgeon and to have source control.

Get that appendix out, manage the diverticulitis, you got the idea, and then there's tertiary, which you'll sometimes get and that is the surgeon took care of, let's say the appendix, and oh, they got a post-surgical abcess, all right, or a post-op infection.

So, those are now more opportunistic infections and you have to control those.

I will just make in one, just to distinguish this, the spontaneous bacterial peritonitis versus infection associated with peritoneal dialysis, just know the diagnosis, the numbers are just a little different.

You have 250, greater than 250 white blood cells for spontaneous bacterial peritonitis.

Peritoneal dialysis is usually due to gram-positives, usually staph or strep, and as soon as you have any suspicion of that and you have any white cells, you need to cover for staph and strep.

All right, abdominal pain, when it comes to the elderly, be careful, they often have, they're often harboring something worse.

They more often get hospitalized, more likely to be diagnosed, more likely needed surgery, so, you know, when I have patients come in with abdominal pain and they're elderly and I'm contemplating, "Ah, it's constipation", I just take a step back and say, "Is it really constipation?

Is it something else?" I just make certain before I discharge that patient with constipation as a cause of that elderly person's abdominal pain.

All right, let's talk about some specific conditions they can ask you about when it comes to the abdomen and that is abdominal wall and hernias.

So, let's talk about hernias, I like to work my way in.

So, here's a question, you have a 72-year-old female presents with a six hour history of painful lump in her groin.

There's some nausea, no vomiting, no fever, chills, just a painful lump in the groin.

You go examine the patient, the abdomen's fine, the right groin has a palpable mass below or inferior to the inguinal ligament.

Despite gentle firm pressure, the mass does not disappear.

Hmm?

The most likely diagnosis is, "A, a strangulated indirect inguinal hernia, B, a reducible direct inguinal hernia, C, an incarcerated femoral hernia or D, an incarcerated Spigelian hernia." All right, so good, 2/3's of you got it, it's an incarcerated femoral hernia.

Why is it most likely to be an incarcerated femoral hernia?

Well just recognize the, you know, the difference between incarcerated and strangulated.

Incarcerated means it's stuck, you can't reduce it and when the vascular supply is finally compromised, now it's strangulated, that portion of the bowel is dying.

The most common hernias you'll find are the indirect inguinal hernias, that's the most common one, direct is second most common.

When you've got that inguinal hernia, I love it when the residents come up and say this to me, "Oh, well I saw a patient, they have an indirect inguinal hernia." I say, "How do you know that?" "Well, they got a lump there in the groin right here." It's like on exam, you cannot tell if it's indirect or direct, you can't tell, you just have the lump there in the groin, okay?

Now the femoral hernias, right off the bat, are more common in women and as I had in that and said in that question, it's located below or inferior to the inguinal ligament, typically medial to the femoral pulse.

This question comes up sometimes, "Is watchful waiting appropriate?" So, you have someone who's got an inguinal hernia, all right, they may say, "Doc, do I need to get this operated on?", or you might be thinking, "Should I send 'em to a surgeon?" Well, this is where you have shared decision making with the patient.

So, if they've got an inguinal hernia and it's not bothering them much, you just happen to pick it up, "Yep, it's there." "I didn't even know it, you know, just not bothering me." It's completely reducible and you know, "I really don't wanna get an operation", that's appropriate.

Okay, you can do watchful waiting.

You may wanna counsel 'em on the fact that the chance of it becoming a surgical emergency is actually very low.

It actually is very, very low.

However, most patients, about 3/4's, 2/3's to 3/4's of 'em eventually, eventually find their way into the hands of a surgeon 'cause it does end up getting uncomfortable and they'll ask you this question, "Well, if I got this thing in my groin, can I still exercise?

Can I still run?

Can I do stuff?" The answer is yes.

Remember, exercise is good, okay, it's always the answer on the Boards, okay.

All right, next question, this is a true case.

"67-year-old patient with a history of chronic low back pain presents with six hours of sudden, severe, diffuse abdominal pain." His medications include celecoxib because of his chronic use for his back pain, three days ago he went to an orthopedic urgent care because his back pain worsened and they put him on a Medrol Dosepak.

His vital signs there, you see, blood pressure's okay, he's tacky, his respiratory rate's up, oh by the way, that's SIRS, okay?

He's afebrile, "his abdomen's diffusely tender, with guarding and rebound, an upright chest x-ray demonstrates free air under the diaphragm." Hmm?

All right, the most likely diagnosis in this situation would be an "acute ischemic bowel, B, a perforated duodenal ulcer, C, a perforated appendicitis or D, a perforated diverticulitis." Good, perforated duodenal ulcer.

That sounds good to me, that's exactly what it is.

This person's at high risk for just that, okay, the perforated duodenal ulcer is the most common cause for air under the diaphragm or free air in the abdomen.

All right, why?

Why was this person at high risk?

They're on chronic NSAID use and then you put 'em on a steroid on top of it?

Don't do that.

Don't do that.

Nothing good on the gut when you do that, all right, and yes, you can, if you're in your office setting, you don't have a CT available, just do the upright chest x-ray, it's really, really sensitive.

It's old school I know, but it does get you an answer and it can detect very, very little air under the diaphragm.

Okay, all right, next patient.

Something else in the abdomen.

"A 60-year-old patient presents to the ED", or your office "with three days of worsening right upper quadrant pain.

The pain radiates to the right scapula, there's nausea and vomiting." The temperature, hmm, that's not good, it's elevated.

Pulse, hmm, elevated, blood pressure, not too good, 90 over 45.

He and worse than this, he's jaundiced, and his bilirubin's 7.8.

His right upper upper quadrant's tender, most likely diagnosis here is "A, acute cholecystitis, B, ascending cholangitis, C, gallstone pancreatitis or D, gallstone ileus." Now hopefully a lot of you picked B.

2/3's of you did, good, it's ascending cholangitis.

This gentleman is demonstrating Charcot's triad.

Well, let's get into gallstone disease.

So, who's at risk of getting gallstones?

People, well, there's a family history, that's one, obesity, sedentary lifestyle, cyclic weight change.

They have asked this question in the past and it's true, patients who have dramatic loss in weight such as when they go through bariatric surgery will precipitate out stones.

I've got a funny feeling I'll start seeing some reports not too distant future that when people are taking the Wegovy's of the world, that they start, yeah, 'cause everybody's on them now it seems that they're gonna start precipitating out gallstones, so be aware, be careful with cyclic weight change.

It's not always just cholesterol stones, by the way, think about patients who have high red blood cell turnover such as your sickler's, they will have black, the hemoglobin stones are the black pigmented stones.

All right, but again, the cholesterol stones are the most common ones, 80%.

What do you do if the patient is, oh they went, they were 65, they went for their Triple A exam, like we talked about earlier, and, oh, the ultrasonographer just decided to take a look at the right upper quadrant 'cause, well, they just had some time and they see some stones.

You know, you get the report back, gallstones, you ask the patient, "You got any belly pain, right upper quadrant pain?" "No, I don't have any pain." So, asymptomatic stones, what do you do with them?

Nothing, okay?

Nothing, all right, you do not do anything 'cause the vast majority of 'em will have no problem with them.

Once they become symptomatic, now you're gonna wanna consider surgery.

All right, so how do they present symptomatically?

All right, I like to do things anatomically in my brain, so you can have a stone sitting there in the gallbladder, you eat the fatty meal, it kicks around, you get right upper quadrant pain and that's biliary colic, right?

When a stone decides to sit there in the cystic duct, now it's obstructive and so what will happen is that the bile will start backing up behind it, it will get infected, typically with a gram-negative, you'll then get some right upper quadrant pain and discomfort.

You'll have a positive Murphy's sign, right, and positive Murphy's sign, by the way, I always ask the residents this, they always get it wrong, is you have the patient laying down, you put your hand in the right upper quadrant, deep in there and it's not ouch at that point, that's a Murphy's sign, it's you take a deep inspiration, ah-ah-ah, ah, and it's cessation with inspiration is a positive Murphy's sign.

Okay, cessation of inspiration.

All right, now let's say the stone decides to get into the common duct, now that was our case scenario, you're gonna end up potentially with ascending cholangitis 'cause now you've got that common duct obstructed, it will dilate, bile will back up into the liver, you get jaundiced, you have right upper quadrant pain, you'll typically get fever, again from gram-negatives infecting the area, that's Charcot's triad, that was our patient, ascending cholangitis.

Sometimes the stone decides to go down and obstruct the ampulla of Vater, that's gallstone pancreatitis, and last but not least, sometimes that you get a huge, huge stone that will erode through the wall of the gallbladder and create a fistula and it will enter the small bowel and it will then travel downtown and then get hung up at the most narrow portion, the ileocecal valve, and then you will get a gallstone ileus, that's what gallstone ileus is.

All right, everything I just told you is on this slide.

You can just take this slide out, it's exactly what I just told you or you can look at the pretty pictures, whichever way you best remember it, all right.

All right, how do you go about evaluating patients?

A patient comes in with some right upper quadrant pain, you know, you say, "Well, sounds like gallstone disease." All right, so you start with an ultrasound.

Suppose you're convinced it sure sounds like biliary colic, it sure sounds like gallstone disease, but there's no stone there.

Well, they may have the functional gallbladder disorder.

It used to be what we call dyskinesia, but the fancy term is the functional gallbladder disorder.

So, in those situations, you send them on for a nuclear scan, whether you call it a PIPIDA or a HIDA scan, whatever your place calls it, and if they have a a decreased ejection fraction that's abnormal.

Those patients, if they go on for their cholecystectomy, in general, will do well for their functional gallbladder disorder.

All right, I'm moving from the right upper quadrant to the right lower quadrant, appendicitis.

Very common, as you can see, 6% to 7% of the population at one point in time will have appendicitis, it's often due to an appendicolith that gets lodged in there and everything behind that appendicolith gets dilated, infected and you have appendicitis.

There's some of the number of the signs there, I will mention, and why I put in red down below, the Carnett sign is not a sign of appendicitis.

They've asked this question, Carnett sign is when you ask the patient to do an abdominal crunch, okay, and if the pain persists with the crunch or it's still tender with a crunch, when you're crunching, what are you doing?

You're protecting the peritoneum, right?

So, all you're doing is getting abdominal wall origin of that pain, okay, not inside.

The others are the ones associated with appendicitis, however, Rovsing's sign, Psoas sign, obturator sign, this is the signs and how you do them.

All right, so here's a question, You have a 6-year-old, you're evaluating for abdominal pain, "You have a moderate degree of suspicion that the patient has appendicitis." He's tender over McBurney's point, it hurts down there, right, lower quadrant, he's not eating, he may even be vomiting.

"The American College of Radiology and American Academy of Pediatric recommends which of the following as the first choice to evaluate this patient?" You should start with an X-ray of the abdomen, you should start with an abdominal ultrasound, you should start with a CT of the abdomen and pelvis or you should start with an MRI of the abdomen and pelvis.

What are you gonna send this child for to help firm up your diagnosis before you call the surgeon?

All right, good, hopefully you got this.

Yeah, you start with ultrasound, everybody's gotten familiar with this now.

You do ultrasound, yes, ultrasound is really, really useful in this age group as well as in patients under the age 14 or if they're pregnant, okay, that's what you go with, otherwise in adults you start with CT and they're non-pregnant, all right?

All right, now there was one question, in-service question, and so I put this in and you may ask me in the Q &amp; A, so I just, I put this in.

Could it show up with the Boards?

I don't know, but it's this whole idea of maybe we don't need to send everybody off to surgery for their appendicitis.

How about just give them antibiotics and cool it down and make it go away?

All right, and there is data out there, I put a lot of references in there that suggest that antibiotics alone will eliminate the need for surgery in about 2/3's of the cases, 2/3's of the cases, with less overall complications, less need for pain meds, less sick time and people go back to work earlier and they found the same in children.

The areas of uncertainty I've put up there also, we still are not certain what the right antibiotic is, the duration of the antibiotic, do you keep 'em in house and observe 'em?

Do you send them home, bring 'em back?

What if there's an appendicolith?

There's some suggestion if you have an appendicolith sitting in there, this may not be as useful and so you get the idea, but understand, they did ask one question about this and in particular the advantages of antibiotics over surgery.

All right, intestinal obstruction, which is the most common cause of large bowel obstruction?

Is it adhesions from previous surgery, neoplasm, herniation, or volvulus?

Yeah, this one, I know invariably, I wanna say everyone picks small, picks adhesions, I understand that.

If the question was small bowel, absolutely it's always adhesions, adhesions, adhesions, it's usually adhesions in hernias, #2.

If it's large bowel, the most common cause is neoplasm, actually, is neoplasm.

All right, there I've already said to you about small bowel, large bowel, those are the causes.

We all, the symptoms of both are very similar, you get the colicky, abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea early on and eventually no output from below and then all starts with the vomiting, vomiting, vomiting and you've seen that.

On small bowel obstruction you can do plain films, you'll see those dilated loops of bowel and the air fluid levels.

In the case of small bowel obstruction, how do you management?

You manage that with NG tube, IV hydration and non-surgical intervention works over 50% of the time, so that's what you try first.

If the patient becomes unstable or peritonitis develops or any suggestion of strangulation, then you go on to surgery.

Large bowel obstruction, more common in the elderly because it's most often due to a malignancy and I'll leave it at that.

You will see here how a large bowel obstruction occurs, this is a malignancy down here in the rectosigmoid area and everything just backs up behind it and the cecum is the area that will dilate preferentially and may perforate.

Management of that is surgical and if it's end of life care, they asked this question once in-service, you give steroids to help to bring down whatever edema and swelling is there.

Sigmoid volvulus is another cause of a large bowel obstruction.

This is a very elderly patient, typically large floppy sigmoid, who one day goes shoo, twists on the mesentary and that's sigmoid volvulus.

There you have to call up your GI colleagues and they need to put a scope in and detorse this.

There you go, usually it's 80th decade.

Cecal volvulus is actually a congenital cause, happens typically in the 5th, 6th decade, more in women and one day it will just flop around.

Vascular disease in the abdomen, I'm gonna mention this real quickly to you, there's four vascular problems, typical, common problems that can happen to the abdomen.

The first is chronic mesenteric ischemia.

What is chronic mesenteric?

That's intestinal angina.

So like, you know, we talked about claudication is angina of the legs, this is intestinal angina.

Who says, you know, you can't put your atherosclerotic plaque right there at the beginning of the SMA?

Who tends to get this?

Women more than men, okay, and they will come in with postprandial abdominal pain.

They're, it's intestinal angina, okay?

All right, what about acute mesenteric ischemia?

I've already suggested this is when you have a person who's got AFib, the clot goes down, takes a right hand turn and pops into the SMA and they infarct all the bowel.

Ischemic colitis, this is your elderly patient whose septic, has a dehydrated low-flow state where they will, there's this watershed area where the middle colic artery and the inferior mesenteric artery sort of meet, typically around the splenic flexure that can become ischemic because they're just low-flow, you know, they're dehydrated, not getting enough flow to that area and then there's acute mesenteric venous thrombosis and just understand, we always think about DVT and we always think, "Oh, just the legs, right?" Well, no, you have a venous side here and patients who are predisposed to DVT's can get their DVT in their mesenteric side.

Pediatric surgery, all on your supplemental slides.

There's four pediatric surgical conditions you should be aware of they can ask you about.

Intussusception, Meckel's diverticulum, hypertrophic pyloric stenosis and necrotizing enterocolitis, they're all in your handout, just review those and we'll go from there.

Thank you.

Thank you very much, Dr. Dachs.