Always a good day is Dr. Garry, though.

He's gonna take over now as we talk about fracture care.

Thank you, Joseph.

Thank you, David.

Okay, so we're gonna talk about some pediatric fractures and then adult fractures.

I would, for those of you that, particularly who are gonna take the exam, please pay attention to the supplemental slides about complications of bracing and casting as well as stress fractures, okay?

All right, so let's get started.

If I'm concerned about a fracture, my first line is X-rays, and generally I want three views to be able to identify what's going on, an AP, a lateral, and an oblique in general terms.

My second line is non-contrast MRI for fracture assessment if that's what I need.

There's a caveat to that and that's a non-contrast CT.

So in two fracture types, I want a non-contrast CT as my second line.

Intra-articular distal radial fracture that's displaced.

So I see that on X-ray.

I want to be able to get a better idea of the degree of displacement of that and a tibial plateau fracture, okay?

These, they're prone to developing osteoarthritis post-fracture.

So I want to optimize my treatment of those and surgical decisions will be made based on the CT.

So if you're concerned about it, get the CT as you're referring them to the orthopedist, if that would be your next step, so that they have all the information at the time they see the patient.

Pediatric fractures, roughly 1/3 of them are gonna involve the growth plate.

Roughly 1/3 of them are gonna involve the fingers.

And it's relatively uncommon that you're gonna have a growth deformity as a result of a pediatric fracture.

Again, if you suspect a fracture, get radiographs in this population primarily because of the open physis.

We're gonna see a bit of a caveat about that when we talk about the ankle.

And then they always like to ask some kind of question about you have some intra-articular fracture in this 8-year-old or 7-year-old or 12-year-old and that intra-articular fracture is gonna be displaced.

So what are you gonna do with it?

Well, again, because we're trying to preserve the joint in pediatric and adolescent patients, particularly with open growth plates, we're almost always going to have an open reduction and internal fixation for any displaced intra-articular fracture.

Whether it's the toe, whether it's the hand, the elbow, the knee, wherever it may be.

Here are your Salter-Harris classifications.

Remember type one is a fracture through the physis.

Type two is the most common type.

I would pay attention to that most common type that you're gonna see through the physis and then up into the metaphysis.

Type three and four are intra-articular.

So these almost always end up at a surgeon because they're gonna need a pin or a wire in them to optimize the joint.

And then type five is a crush injury.

Okay, so let's go into some specific fractures and specific things I want you to pay attention to.

The supracondylar fracture, five to seven or eight-year olds, they fall on an outstretched hand.

We call that a FOOSH injury.

We're gonna see a lot of that in this talk.

So I'm just gonna refer to it as FOOSH injuries.

These kids are gonna present usually with a painful elbow.

They don't want to move it, and they may have already ecchymosis, tenderness, and or swelling in the antecubital fossa.

You'll get your radiographs to look for this.

If you have anything other than a non-displaced fracture, that would be a type one.

Anything else by general standards will be referred to an orthopedic surgeon, okay?

Any kind of displacement would get referred.

In my experience, most family medicine physicians aren't really all that comfortable taking care of supracondylar fractures period, even if they're completely non-displaced.

But if it is non-displaced, put 'em in a long arm cast, recheck them in one week, and then three weeks.

Again, as long as they remain non-displaced, they can be treated.

What I want you to pay attention to is the most commonly entrapped nerve in a supracondylar fracture is the anterior interosseous nerve, okay?

That overlaps with the median nerve so that if they can make an okay sign, the anterior interosseous nerve is intact.

On your lateral film of the elbow, you have fat pads.

And remember, you see the outline of the anterior fat pad here.

It's the blacker shading because there's fluid in the joint, and so it pushes the capsule out anteriorly.

And so you get this darkness or this black, degree of blackness anteriorly.

That's suggestive of a fracture.

If I see that on a plain film, I'm thinking, okay, maybe an intra-articular fracture involved here.

If the posterior fat pad is involved, and here I see the posterior fat pad, that blackness should be adherent to the posterior humerus, but it's not.

It's migrating out posteriorly because there's fluid in the joint, then that's really pathognomonic of an intra-articular fracture.

So I need to treat them as a fracture, even though I don't see it on my radiographs.

I bring them back in a week, and I repeat my radiographs, and there's that supracondylar fracture, okay?

So now you can either decide you're gonna treat this if it's a type one, or you're gonna refer them on.

In pediatrics, in an acute elbow injury, if they're unable to extend the elbow fully, that is associated with elbow fractures.

So be aware of that.

Here's a buckle or torus fracture.

This is about 50% of all wrist fractures that occur.

What's new?

You've all seen this.

What's new?

Assuming I have a reliable parent, okay, this is what you're gonna do.

You put 'em in a soft wrist splint, you tell 'em to keep that on for three weeks.

In three weeks, the parent just palpates the area.

If the kid's okay, take off the splint and let 'em go, okay?

There is no return to the office.

There is no repeat radiographs, there is no casting that's involved, okay?

That is new.

And you see the choosing wisely with the data that's come out on that now too.

Okay, so our first question.

A 3-year-old male is brought to your office by his mother to evaluate his left arm, which he stopped using earlier today after walking home with his mother from preschool.

He cries when the elbow is manipulated and keeps his left arm at his side.

Elbow radiographs are negative for fracture.

Using an evidence-based approach to your patient, which would be the most successful initial treatment.

Okay, hyperpronation, terrific.

Flexion supination is what 60% of us in here probably learned when we were training.

Now hyperpronation is what can be used.

This is nursemaid's elbow.

Remember, these are your toddlers.

It's a traction injury to the elbow.

Typically when you're holding the hand, pulling the toddler toward you or keeping them from running off someplace and you support the elbow, take the hand, and pronate it all the way over while you're supporting the elbow, and you can feel the radial head, and you get all the way over, and you'll feel it pop right back in, okay?

That's first line treatment.

And frankly is easier for someone who's done both.

Many times the hyperpronation is a lot easier.

Clavicle is the most commonly fractured bone in the body, and virtually all of these occur in the middle third.

So what you want to do is you're gonna put individuals in a sling.

You do not need to put them in a figure eight.

You can, you do not need to because the outcomes are equivalent whether you put an individual in a figure of eight or you put them in a sling, okay?

So sling is generally preferred.

Okay, our next question.

A 44-year-old female tripped and fell on the ice on an outstretched left hand, another FOOSH injury.

She presents with this radiograph.

So the question is, what is the most commonly injured nerve in this injury?

Is it musculocutaneous, median, radial, or ulnar nerve?

Okay good, median.

Not radial, but let's talk about what we have, a distal radial fracture.

So roughly one in five fractures that we see in adults are distal radial fractures.

Far and away the most common etiology is osteoporosis.

So we should just define a fragility fracture.

Fragility fracture is one of the, a fragility fracture in a postmenopausal female or a male over 70 is a clinical diagnostic indicator for osteoporosis.

A fragility fracture is, I'm walking down the street, and I trip, and I fall, and I put my hand out, okay?

If I'm 25, and I break my wrist, I broke my wrist.

If I'm a postmenopausal female or a male over 70, and I do that, it's a fragility fracture.

It's a fracture that occurs from a standing height.

I did not fall off a ladder, I did not fall off the roof.

I did not fall out of my deer stand or wherever I was.

There's no trauma, so to speak, that's involved short of falling from a standing height.

So that's our diagnosis of fragility fracture.

It's important because you're gonna see a theme here about assessment of bone health for individuals.

It's important because if I have that history, I want an assessment of bone health.

DXA, okay?

All right, so for these, median nerve is the most commonly involved nerve entrapment that occurs with distal radial fractures.

And remember, if I have an intra-articular fracture, and it appears that I have even one to two millimeters of displacement along the articular surface, I want a non-contrast CT.

I can get the non-contrast CT.

And if I think, you know, I'm not comfortable handling this, I'm gonna send it on to the orthopedic surgeon, get the non-contrast CT before their appointment, so that they can make the decision because that's the next step.

Okay, and this I would give to you, this is gonna be covered elsewhere this week, but I would give you this to print off and study.

There are oftentimes lots of questions with regards to innervation of the hand itself.

So you have that.

Okay, our next question.

A 36-year-old female presents to your office and reports that she had a FOOSH injury in the left hand three days ago, presents with left wrist pain, minor swelling in this radiograph.

So take a look at it, and then I'll ask you a question.

Okay, what's the best treatment option?

You're gonna refer her for surgical fixation, put her in a volar wrist splint for eight weeks, a short arm cast for eight weeks, or a thumb spica cast for eight weeks.

Good, thumb spica cast.

So right, this individual had a non-displaced scaphoid fracture of the, we would call this the waist of the waist of the scaphoid fracture.

So in terms of scaphoid fractures, yes, they occur with FOOSH injuries.

Yes, I generally have minor swelling, but I have pain.

Remember that I am tender in the anatomical snuff box and my initial radiographs may well be negative, and if they are but I suspect this, then I must put them in some kind of thumb spica splint, cast, something, to immobilize that area, and then bring them back and repeat radiographs in one to two weeks.

And remember that the scaphoid blood supply is distal to proximal.

So I really like those distal fractures because they heal more quickly.

They have a lower tendency to non-union, they do better.

The proximal fractures are the ones that have a higher propensity to non-union and higher propensity toward avascular necrosis.

That's a problem.

Okay, no clear benefit to operative intervention of an acute non-displaced scaphoid fracture.

But if I do have some displacement, I want to get them referred to surgery because fixation is really the faster recovery method.

It's simply, it's a tiny little incision and a screw that goes in.

It's less than a 15 minute surgery, right?

It takes an hour to get 'em into the OR, it takes 'em 10 minutes to do the surgery.

It takes 'em one or two hours in recovery when they're done.

Okay, so our next question, a 17-year-old football player comes to clinic the morning after a game in which he injured the ring finger of his right hand.

He grabbed the jersey of an opposing player as he tackled him and immediately felt pain in the distal aspect of the affected finger.

On examination, there's mild swelling of the finger, and he cannot flex at the distal interphalangeal joint.

Radiographs show a small bony fragment at the volar surface of the proximal distal phalanx.

So our question, which of the following is the most appropriate management for this individual?

Are you gonna refer him to a hand surgeon?

Are you gonna splint the distal interphalangeal joint in flexion for eight weeks, splint the distal interphalangeal joint in extension for eight weeks, or splint the proximal interphalangeal joint in extension for six weeks, followed by night splinting for another four to six weeks.

Okay, so about half of you want to send to the hand surgeon, which would be correct.

We're gonna move right on into another finger question.

A 33-year-old male presents with suspected dislocated finger.

He was playing volleyball the previous day when he jammed his left fifth finger.

On examination, the distal interphalangeal joint to the left fifth digit has full passive range of motion, but he cannot actively extend the distal phalanx.

A radiograph of the digit is normal.

Which of the following is now most appropriate for this individual?

Okay, terrific, so we got these, all right, and we'll just briefly talk.

The first one was jersey finger.

It's an avulsion of the flexor digitorum profundus tendon.

It's a flexor tendon.

It tends to retract, you can't immobilize and get healing.

So these are surgical cases, and we do wanna pay attention to this.

If they're three weeks out, it's a done deal.

There's no surgery to be done typically.

You can't stretch that muscle back out to be able to reattach it.

So we really want to get these individuals into the OR, the sooner the better but certainly within the first two weeks.

A Boutonniere deformity, this is a central slip injury of the finger where the lateral extensor bands at the proximal interphalangeal joint, they sublux over the joint.

They gradually pull that proximal interphalangeal joint into flexion and then subsequently the distal interphalangeal joint into extension or hyper extension, yeah, in kind of a hyperextension of the joint, the joint itself, even though the distal aspect comes into extension.

So if I have this, and it takes time for these to develop, then what I do is I work at getting the proximal interphalangeal joint splinted into a neutral position or a straightened out position trying to get that flexion out of it.

And this is a case where I'm gonna splint that joint for a period of time, and then I'm gonna follow it with night splinting for a period of time.

And the last one's the mallet finger.

And the mallet finger, I have avulsed that extensor digitorum tendon.

We've all seen this.

And so for these, I want to immobilize only the distal interphalangeal joint only in extension or hyperextension if I can a little bit, and I'm going to keep them fully immobilized for a period of six to eight weeks before I ever remove the splint.

This is where if your patient comes back and they say, well, Doc, I changed this splint myself at home, and I took it off and then I did some things around the house, and then I put it back on.

You're starting over from the time they did that, right?

We reset the clock from that standpoint.

Okay, this is for your clinical practice.

You can print this out.

You've got your finger injuries, your exam, management, and then if you have any referrals that we would make based upon that.

Okay, so let's move ahead to another question.

A 74-year-old female patient with hypertension, osteoporosis, and arthritis is seen for routine follow up.

She notes an increase in her back pain about two months ago.

She denies any trauma or associated symptoms.

Her medications include a thiazide, a bisphosphonate, a proton pump inhibitor, and a non-steroidal.

Her exam is unchanged other than some mild diffuse low back tenderness.

You obtain this radiograph.

So I'll give you a minute to look at this radiograph.

She's had an increase in back pain about two months ago.

Okay, so the question is, which of the following statements is correct?

She has an increased mortality rate of 15% over those without this condition, she will need to be evaluated for multiple myeloma, this is going to require surgical intervention, or 20% of these remain undiagnosed.

Okay, so the correct answer is A, and we're gonna go over this.

This is a vertebral compression fracture at L1.

So we want to pay attention, vertebral compression fractures because of the mechanics of the spine occur pretty consistently between T8 and L2 and then L4.

Those are the vertebra that we're really looking at.

Osteoporosis, osteoporosis, osteoporosis.

And then the fourth leading cause is not osteoporosis, it's osteoporosis risk factors, okay?

All right, so you have that.

Not 20% of these remain undiagnosed, but 66 to 67% remain undiagnosed.

Why?

Because our elderly patients think chronic pain or pain is part of the normal aging process.

So they tend not to bring this to your attention.

They don't come in to say, oh, well you know, my back's been hurting more.

Well, I'm getting old, I have aches and pains.

This is just part of that process.

And that's why so many of these are undiagnosed.

Why do these individuals have higher mortality?

Because when we have thoracic vertebral compression fractures particularly, we tend to have a bit more of kyphosis that develops over time.

Again, you've seen this in your patients, and they develop restrictive pulmonary disease, and that's a problem, especially as we get older.

And then some of these are gonna occur because there's underlying malignancy.

So individuals with vertebral compression fractures, particularly elderly, have a higher risk of mortality than those without this.

Okay, so what do we want to do with the vertebral compression fracture?

These are really key points and I want you to know each one of these inside and out.

You're gonna manage pain so you can get them moving as quickly as possible, hopefully within 24 hours.

So if it's somebody that I have to admit to the hospital because they're in so much pain, I want to address that pain as quickly as possible so I can get them up and moving.

This is the one place in an osteoporotic vertebral compression fracture, it's the one indication for the use of calcitonin.

We use nasal calcitonin, gives moderately good pain relief.

The second thing that I want you to pay attention to and know is that if I have an individual who has a fragility fracture and this vertebral compression fracture would count as a fragility fracture, no trauma, I'm postmenopausal female or a male over 70, and I sustain a vertebral compression fracture, you need to evaluate their bone health.

And we do that by getting a DXA.

And third, when we use bisphosphonates, we essentially put a five-year limit on our use.

And that's a total limit over lifetime.

Otherwise, as I go beyond that, I have marked increase in my atypical femoral fractures, particularly for these individuals.

Okay, I do wanna mention pelvic insufficiency fractures because you also see these.

It's again, osteoporosis, osteoporosis, osteoporosis are causes for these.

Individuals who sit down a little too hard.

They may have missed the edge of the bed as they're sitting down, but they say, don't worry, Doc, I lowered myself down to the ground.

And they come into the ER, they come in, or into our office in a wheelchair, but by the time we see them, examine them, and try and get them up to walk, they can't walk because it's too painful.

Get radiographs for these individuals.

If the radiographs are negative, but you still suspect this, or you have osteopenia on your radiographs, then you have to decide between a CT or a MRI.

And a CT is good.

I mean it's markedly better than radiographs.

It's good, but you're just gonna have to make that decision.

Do I need to wait a couple hours and get the MRI, or do I get the CT, and I'm done in 15 minutes?

And you kind of have to decide, am I gonna have to admit this person in the first place?

I've already gotta admit 'em, maybe I'll go with the CT, I'll presumptively make the diagnosis if the CT is negative.

You just have to make those decisions.

But remember, MRI is still the premier exam for osteoporotic pelvic insufficiency fractures.

Think about getting a baseline hemoglobin when they come in, especially if you're admitting them, so that you can measure it the following day because they can put one or two units of blood here in the pelvis.

So again, pay attention to that.

Realize that you're immediately looking for subacute rehab or transitional care for these individuals because their average length of stay is 14 to 45 days before they can consider returning home.

And again, work-up for osteoporosis.

A few comments about hip fracture almost always caused by falling directly onto the hip.

And not a surprise that it affects women more.

Women live longer than men.

Women have a higher rate of osteoporosis than men.

And so here's the data.

What we really want to do, if I could impact you any way in terms of your practice, your clinical practice, this is where I would try and impact you.

This is prevention of the hip fracture in the first place.

So keeping our patients active, keeping them exercising, keeping them strong, so that they can maintain balance and paying attention to bone health in our patients.

Why?

Because when I take a group of patients who, a group of individuals who are living independently, right, in their own homes with their spouse, by themselves, with others, and they sustain a hip fracture, okay?

1/3 of them are gonna be dead within a year related to that hip fracture, okay?

1/3 of them will be dead.

Tang's data is the newest.

He had 37% die within the first 6 to 12 months developed a pneumonia, they developed a DVT PE is a complication of it, I had a postoperative complication, et cetera, et cetera.

But 1/3 of 'em are dead within a year.

And another roughly 30% are going to a nursing home and staying in a nursing home.

So my outcome is 60%, right?

Roughly 30% are gonna be dead and 30% are gonna be in a nursing home from people who are living independently.

So if I can prevent that hip fracture, I should be able to keep that individual in their home living independently.

And I think that's something we really want to pay attention to.

Okay, our last question here.

Which of the following is not a factor in the Ottawa Ankle Rules?

Okay good, so the anterior distal fibula, right?

The Ottawa Ankle Rules say I should be looking at the posterior distal fibula.

So you've got this.

These are mostly non-displaced fractures.

If I have malleolar fractures, if it's one, put 'em in a boot, keep them comfortable, or a short leg cast.

If it's two or three, remember I have a third malleoli, the posterior malleolus.

If I have two or three, generally it's gonna be referral to a surgeon because they generally are unstable and might need to have a few of them fixed.

Here are your Ottawa Ankle Rules.

Again, I would print this out, I would pay attention to it.

I would read it carefully.

Understand it if you don't use it, but half of you do, and you know it.

So that's great.

Again, this just talks about the malleolar fractures in a boot.

If I have a posterior malleolar fracture, I start with four weeks of non-weight-bearing in a boot or a cast, and then I transition to weightbearing once I start having a little bit of healing.

The proximal fifth metatarsal, if I have a tuberosity fracture that's in the purple region, do what you want with it, put 'em in a boot, put 'em in a cast shoe, wrap 'em up.

I mean, whatever makes them comfortable enough to walk on it because they're gonna heal.

If they're in the metaphyseal-diaphyseal junction, that's a Jones fracture.

They have a 50% non-union rate.

So these individuals have to be non-weight-bearing for four to six weeks, demonstrate that they have some healing on radiographs, and then transition them to weight-bearing.

Typically, we'll send 'em to orthopedics, again, a 10 minute operation, small incision, put a screw in, you're all done.

And you don't have that risk of non-union that occurs.

And the last, this is our last slide, radial palsy, radial nerve involvement is radial palsy, and that is crutch palsy that can occur.

And that's from the improper fitting of crutches, okay?

Thank you very much.

Thank you very much, Dr. Gary.